# Day 1 of Learning Java from basics.

# Introduction to Java programming

JAVA was developed by Sun Microsystems Inc in 1991, later acquired by Oracle Corporation. It was developed by James Gosling and Patrick Naughton. It is a simple programming language. Writing, compiling and debugging a program is easy in java. It helps to create modular programs and reusable code.

# Java Virtual Machine (JVM)

This is generally referred as JVM. Before, we discuss about JVM lets see the phases of program execution. Phases are as follows: we write the program, then we compile the program and at last we run the program.

1. Writing of the program is of course done by java programmer like you and me.
2. Compilation of program is done by javac compiler, javac is the primary java compiler included in java development kit (JDK). It takes java program as input and generates java bytecode as output.
3. In third phase, JVM executes the bytecode generated by compiler. This is called program run phase

# bytecode

As discussed above, javac compiler of JDK compiles the java source code into bytecode so that it can be executed by JVM. The bytecode is saved in a .class file by compiler.

# Java Development Kit(JDK)

While explaining JVM and bytecode, I have used the term JDK. Let’s discuss about it. As the name suggests this is complete java development kit that includes JRE (Java Runtime Environment), compilers and various tools like JavaDoc, Java debugger etc.
In order to create, compile and run Java program you would need JDK installed on your compute

# Java Runtime Environment(JRE)

JRE is a part of JDK which means that JDK includes JRE. When you have JRE installed on your system, you can run a java program however you won’t be able to compile it. JRE includes JVM, browser plugins and applets support. When you only need to run a java program on your computer, you would only need JRE.

# Main Features of JAVA

## Java is a platform independent language

Compiler(javac) converts source code (.java file) to the byte code(.class file). As mentioned above, JVM executes the bytecode produced by compiler. This byte code can run on any platform such as Windows, Linux, Mac OS etc.

Which means a program that is compiled on windows can run on Linux and vice-versa. Each operating system has different JVM, however the output they produce after execution of bytecode is same across all operating systems. That is why we call java as platform independent language.

## Java is an Object Oriented language

Object oriented programming is a way of organizing programs as collection of objects, each of which represents an instance of a class.

### 4 main concepts of Object Oriented programming are:

Abstraction
Encapsulation
Inheritance
Polymorphism

## Simple

Java is considered as one of simple language because it does not have complex features like Operator overloading, Multiple inheritance, pointers and Explicit memory allocation.

## Secure

We don’t have pointers and we cannot access out of bound arrays (you get ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException if you try to do so) in java. That’s why several security flaws like stack corruption or buffer overflow is impossible to exploit in Java.

## Multithreading

Java supports multithreading. Multithreading is a Java feature that allows concurrent execution of two or more parts of a program for maximum utilisation of CPU.

## High Performance:

Java is a high level language, Its performance has been further improved, thanks to Just-In-Time (JIT) compilers and other performance improvements.

# History of Java

## Original developer and programming name :

James Gosling is considered the original developer of Java language. He is also known as father of Java. He started on this in early 1990s. He originally named it Greentalk and the extension was .gt.

## Programming language renamed from Greentalk to Oak:

When Green team (James Gosling, Mike Sheridan and Patrick Naughton) started working on it, it was renamed to Oak. Oak is a tree name, which is considered a symbol of strength and is a national tree in many countries such as U.S.A., France, Germany, Romania, etc.

## Again renamed from Oak to Java in 1995:

The project is again renamed from Oak to Java in 1995 as Oak was a trademark for other organization.

## Original and first version of Java:

JDK first version alpha & beta was released in 1995 by Sun Microsystems.

## Key Milestones:

1996: The Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.0 was released. Java quickly became popular due to its many features such as robustness, performance, security etc.
1997: JDK 1.1 was released, It came with out of the box features such as JDBC (Java Database Connectivity) API, RMI (Remote Method Invocation) and JavaBeans.
1998: JDK 1.2 was released, It came with various Java editions with the introducing of Java Platform, Standard Edition (Java SE), the Java Platform, Enterprise Edition (Java EE), and the Java Platform, Micro Edition (Java ME).
2004: JDK 1.5 was released, It was marketed as Java 5.0, introducing some popular java features such as generics, enhanced for loop etc.
2006: Sun Microsystems made the JVM, compiler, and key libraries open source under the GNU General Public License (GPL).
2009: Sun Microsystems was acquired by Oracle Corporation, this deal was completed in 2010. Oracle continued the development of Java.

## Java Version History

VERSION RELEASE DATE

JDK Alpha & Beta 1995
JDK 1.0 January 1996
JDK 1.1 February 1997
J2SE 1.2 December 1998
J2SE 1.3 May 2000
J2SE 1.4 February 2002
Java SE 5 September 2004
Java SE 6 December 2006
Java SE 7 July 2011
Java SE 8 March 2014
Java SE 9 September 2017
March 2018
Java SE 11 September 2018
Java SE 12 March 2019
Java SE 13 September 2019
Java SE 14 March 2020
Java SE 15 September 2020
Java SE 16 March 2021
Java SE 17 September 2021
